The Nitty Gritty of Legal Drafting.
INTRODUCTION.
Basically Lawyers are one class of professional’s engaged with so much reading and writing amidst advocacy. Accordingly, The legal profession is in tandem with the maxim, “verba volant, scriptamanent” which is to the effect that spoken words fly away, written words remain”
The typical day to day writing engaged in by members of the legal profession is conveniently classified into legal writing and legal drafting. While Legal writing embraces all kinds of expository writing including that encountered in correspondence, legal opinions and text books on legal subjects, as well as reports of decided cases in which judges set forth their reasons for decision. Legal drafting is the composition of legal instruments such as contracts, deeds, wills and legislation.
Thus, simply put, legal drafting is the act of writing in an acceptable form, legal concepts, laws, opinions, reports or in any related matter such that the rights and liabilities of a person are clearly stated out and understood, having legal consequences. It is the act of constructing a legal document which have a binding, legal effect.
According to Imhanobe legal drafting “is the art of drafting legal document e.g. letters, contracts, deeds, wills, legislative bills, trust, lease, criminal charges, pleadings, appellate briefs etc., legal drafting is an aspect of advanced legal writing, it is a means of communication.”
Drafting is one of the most intellectually demanding aspect of the law profession. It requires knowledge of the law, the ability to deal with abstract concepts, investigative instincts, an extraordinary degree of prescience, and organizational skills.”
Legal drafting is the art of legal writing. Drafting is not a science of law but an art; therefore, to a great extent, it is a highly individual attainment. It cannot be developed without some initial aptitude and it cannot be mastered without practical experience. It does not depend on aptitude and experience alone, but it has it’s rules which can be explained and learned by any person of reasonable intelligence.
STAGES OF  LEGAL DRAFTING
Taking
and understanding instruction
He must take fullest instruction from his client on what his client has in mind and want. In fact the draftsman raw material is the instruction he receives from his client which constitute the fact of the case.
When conducting of interview: Just as the saying goes that there is no second chance to make first impression. A lawyer and good draftsman must win the client’s confidence.  This a draftsman can do by appearing efficient in his action from the start of the interview, Being in control during the entire period of the interview,  feeling and identifying himself with the mood of the clients but not in a mournful mood.
Analysis, Classification and Research
This is where the analytical skill of a lawyer or draftsman starts. This is where the distinction between a lawyer and non lawyer is brought to bear. The lawyer knows where to find the laws. At this stage the lawyer classified the fact received from the client and applies the relevant laws. The fact may fall generally into criminal or civil matter, or public or private law. After the classification the lawyer goes to the library for research to gather material. He uses both secondary and primary sources.
The lawyer’s greatest tool of trade is his books. This makes relevant the words of Hon. Justice Anthony Ekundayo “what is anyone looking for in the legal profession anyway if he does not intend to keep a good library? A lawyer is better without a wig and gown; he may still make a living as solicitor, legal executes or as an advocate appearing before those courts that carry on happily without robes but with no library he would be showing the fate of a blind man holding a driving license”
3. Planning the Draft
In line with the truism that he who fails to plan, plans to fail. At this stage, one is expected to choose the right format to use as different legal document requires different format. E.g. the format for Will is different for letter or deed. Present your draft in a logical order. It also an avenue for the draftsman to keep together related matters and group under the same head. The work of a lawyer at this stage is likened to that of architect in a building project. It is fundamental to the structure of a house. A good draftsman must have a good plan which starts with having clear thought of what he wants.
Composition
This is the most mentally tasking stage. At this stage,  more attention is paid to choice of words, sentences used, structure, paragraphing, grammar etc. However, this is made easier by using precedent. Precedents can be developed as a standard form by the draftsman, or obtained externally from other renowned lawyers.
Editing the draft
A draftsman is usually blind to his own short comings and this underscores the essence of quality control and editing. There are two stages of editing a legal document.
Firstly, the draftsman leaves the documents for a while and returns and edits it. The second is the use of colleagues, editor and linguistics experts. This is to help discover omissions, check to grammar and consistency, jargons, formatting, spellings, punctuation, typographical errors, figure, capitalization.
The second method is preferred because is possible for the draftsman to go through his work without noticing his mistakes. Also suggestion and comments of colleagues are very useful. Errors no matter how minor must be avoided as it can cast doubt on the competence of the draftsman.
RULES OF LEGAL DRAFTING.
According to Adubi  drafting does not depend on aptitude and experience alone, but has its rules which can be explained and learned by any person of reasonable intelligence. The following rules should be observed by a good draftsman.
(a) Maintain accuracy and precision. All superfluous, verbosity, jargons should be avoided.
(b) The draftsman should observe the use of short and simple sentence. This can be achieved by using statutory definitions, definition clause, schedule and paragraphing techniques, and avoid the use of verbosity, acronyms and archaic words etc. Use subject, verb and object style of sentence structure.
(c) The draftsman should conceive general design. That is, the arrangement of both the idea and the draft in order and sequence.
(d)Every draft should cover the instruction from the client. This can be achieved by the use of precise, accurate, clear and Standard English words.
(e) Observe arrangement and order. By this the draftsman is to ensure that each sentence is presented in an order that most readily or clearly brings out the meaning of the sentence. To achieve this, George Coode’s four elements of legal sentence should be observed. The four elements are to be followed in this order of case (where), the condition (e.g. “if”), the legal object or (natural or artificial person) and the legal action (legal consequences).
(f) Avoid the common mistake in English language like;
(i) Subject verb agreement – There must be subject verb agreement (rule of concord) e.g. “The judge is delivery the judgment.”
(ii) Fragment: This is incomplete sentence that lack either subject or verb. It should be avoided.
(iii) Choppy sentence: Collection of sentences that do not link one to the other.
(iv) Run off sentence: A sentence that contains two or more independent clauses wrongly joined.
(v) Loose sentence: Joining of two sentences by wrong connective e.g. “Lawyers do not like to study syntax so they write poorly”. Not “lawyers do not like to study syntax and they write poorly.
(vi) Parallel structure: Sentences in sequences must follow the same structure. e.g. “ Lawyers like to sing, to write and to read.” Not “lawyers like to read, to write and sing – This is bad.
(g) Do not start a sentence with a conjunction, e.g. “and” or “but”
(h) Document should be drafted in paragraph, short, in clauses and sub clause.
(i) Active voice should be used instead of passive voice in most cases.
(j) Draftsman should ensure the draft is checked by himself and colleagues,
(k) Avoid abbreviations.
(l) Vary the length of your paragraph but generally short.
(m) Refer to people and companies by name.
(n) Do not use all capital.
(o) Use punctuation properly.
(p) Minimize your use of proviso
(q) When writing an amount, it better to use numerals not words.
LANGUAGE USED IN LEGAL DRAFTING IN NIGERIA.
The official language of the law in Nigeria is English language. The law is that no court in Nigeria will recognize a document except such a document is written in English or translated to English language. Section 55 of the Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria 1999 as amended is instructive
Also in a plethora of cases English has been recognized to be an official language of the court. In
Damina v. The State
the court held that;
“Now it is a matter of common knowledge and indeed of judicial notice that the lingua franca of Nigeria and official language of the superior court in the country is English.” This was also enunciated in the case of
Ojengbede v. Esen
.
IMPORTANT WORDS AND EXPRESSION AND WORDS RELATING TO TIME.
In computation of time there is the problem of whether to reckon exclusively or inclusively the stated date or dates in legal document. We shall consider some of these expressions.
“ON”- when used it is interpreted as inclusive of the stated date. E.g. on 10th November 2011, includes the stated date. It means the whole day.
“FROM” When used the stated date is construed exclusively. E.g. from 10th November, 2011. It excludes the 10th and starts running on the following day 11th November, 2011. This was brought to limelight in
Cartwright v. Mc Cormick
.
“AT” This is used where it is intended to take into account fraction (hours) of the day. E.g. “commences at 10.00am”. The interpretation is that parties intend to reckon with fractions of day.
“AFTER” When an event is stated to take place after a named date the date of the event is to be excluded. This was in issue in the case of
Brown v. Black
.
“TO” If a legal document expresses “from 10th November to 15th November, 2011. Because of the use of “from”, 10th is excluded but it is not clear whether 15th is included because of the use of “to”. To avoid ambiguity it is better to add “both dates inclusive” or “the 15th day inclusive”.
“TILL” OR “UNTIL” This does not give clear indication of inclusiveness or exclusiveness. To avoid ambiguity use “till and including” or “till but excluding” e.g. “till but excluding 10th November …” “till and including 10th November …”.
“AT THE EXPIRATION OF”. It may mean – not later than the expiration of, or – at or after the expiration of. If within a reasonable time is intended, it should be so stated.
“DAY” This means the period of 24 hours starting at a midnight and ending on the following midnight. Generally it is used to mean the whole day but where fractions, that is, commencing at a particular hour of the day is intended, it should be clearly stated by using the word “at”. This was analyzed in
Belfied v. Belfied
.
“CLEAR DAY” Simply means the period of 24 hours starting at midnight, excluding fractions of a day.
“WORKING DAY” This means Monday to Friday excluding public holiday, Saturday and Sunday. In
Essien v. Essien
, the court of Appeal took judicial notice of Saturday as a work free day. An act to be done on public holiday shall be deemed duly done if done on the next day. However, where the act is to be done within a particular period not exceeding six days holiday shall be left out of account in computing the period.
“A WEEK” This is a seven (7) clear days starting midnight of Saturday to the midnight of the next Saturday. However parties can state in their agreement that the period begins at midnight of any particular day of the week to the midnight of the corresponding day in the next week. E.g. “Midnight Monday to midnight Monday”.
“MONTH” Generally, month can be lunar or calendar month. In Nigeria a month is referred to as a calendar month. For example section 86 of Property and Conveyancing Law 1959 of the former Western Region of Nigeria provides that the word “month” in any deed, will, contracts, order, or other instruments means calendar month. A calendar month ends upon the day in the next ensuing month having same number as that on which the computation began. But if the next ensuing month has not the same number as that on which the computation began, then the calendar month on the last day of the next ensuing month. E.g. calendar month from 28th March expires on 28th April 29th January expires on 28th February 31st August expires on 30th September  as explained in
Akeredolu v. Akinremi
The calendar month is calculated according to the Gregorian calendar. 52 “YEAR” A year is a period of 12 months usually calculated from 1st January to 31st December. When a contrary intention is intended it should be clearly and expressly stated.
“WITHIN A REASONABLE TIME’’/ “AS SOON AS POSSIBLE” “Within a reasonable time” is common in commercial documents and in some cases implied. E.g. at common law time is not of essence in the sale of land but completion should be within a reasonable time.
Monkland v. Jack Barclay.
The phrase should be avoided as it is difficult for two persons to agree on what is a reasonable time. Where possible specify the time frame. “As soon as possible” means shortest possible time or within a practicable time. It is imprecise, unspecific and its construction depends on circumstances of each case. This phrase has been given ordinary meaning by the court, if possible should be avoided as it is capable of more than one meaning.
Varesests Administrix v. Motor Union Ins. Co.Ltd.
Both phrases should be avoided as much as possible. However, where there is uncertainly or the performance of act or obligation depends on prevailing circumstance their use become inevitable.
“NOT LATER THAN” / “NOT EARLIER THAN” In both cases the stated date is inclusive in constructing the period of time. “FORTHWITH” / “IMMEDIATELY” Both words means prompt or without delay. They are imprecise and their meaning depends on the circumstance of each case. “Forthwith” is archaic and should be replaced with immediately. In
London Borough of Hallingdon v. Cutler
where section 17(1) of the U.K Housing Act fell for interpretation and the court held that: 53 Forthwith” is not a precise time and provided that no harm is done. “Forthwith” means any reasonable time thereafter.
RATIONAL FOR STRICT ADHERENCE TO RULES OF LEGAL DRAFTING.
To ensure that legal documents are drafted in a way that it categorically specifies the legal issue, statements of the client and the remedies sought if any.
It also ensures that the legal document is structured properly. An unstructured document without balance lacks effectiveness.
To checkmate the use of negative statements or an aggressive tone in documents which can make a document seem confrontational.
To regulate the use of legalese i.e. complicated legal phrases and jargon that is beyond the comprehension of a layman.
To ensure clarity.
CONCLUSION.
It is important to end on the note that the place and importance of legal writing and legal drafting cannot be over emphasized. Legal drafting can even be said to be an indispensable tool in the profession. This is due to the fact that the bulk of what lawyers do must be expressed clearly in writing whether be it pleadings including briefs or written addresses, proposals, letters, agreement’s or contracts, Court processes, addresses etc. This underscores the reason why every lawyer needs to sharpen his drafting skills so as to be able to provide quality to his clients, accord respect to the court, and the profession at large. Due adherence to rules of drafting is also emphasized so as not to confuse the court hence the importance placed on the draftsman’s duty to ensure a flawless drafting by adhering to strict rules of drafting.
